---
layout: post
title: CA 1.1
---


Let $$K$$ be a field of characteristic $$p\neq 0$$. Define $$\sigma(x)=x^p$$, this map is called the Frobenius endomorphism of $$K$$. 


---------------------------------------------
**Proposition** The map $$\sigma$$ is an injective endomorphism of $$K$$ onto one of its subfields $$K^p$$. 

---------------------------------------------
**Proof:** To check that $$\sigma(x+y)=\sigma(x)+\sigma(y)$$, use the divisibility of the binomial coefficients. That $$\sigma(x)\sigma(y)=\sigma(xy)$$ is obvious. So, this map is an endomorphism. Then to see that this map is injective note that if $$\sigma(x)-\sigma(y)=0$$, then we have that 

$$
0=x^p+y^p=(x+y)^p,
$$

so, $$x+y$$ is equal to $$0$$ as $$K$$ is a field. Note that this is also "clearly injective" as Serre states because every homomorphism of fields is injective. $$\square$$. 

We will now through and establish the following theorem

---------------------------------------------
Let $$\Omega$$ be an algebraically closed field of characteristic $$p$$ and let $$K$$ be a subfield of $$\Omega$$ with degree $$f=[K,F_p]$$ over $$F_p$$. 

* Then $$card(K)=p^f$$. 
* $$K$$ is the fixed field of, $$\sigma^f$$, the $$f$$-fold application of $$\sigma$$ to $$\Omega$$.
* Any field with $$p^f$$ elements is isomorphic to $$K$$.


---------------------------------------------

**Proof**

The first claim follows immediately from the definition of the degree of an extension---we are just picking a basis and counting all of the ways we could form vectors from that basis. 

Next, note that because $$\Omega$$ is complete we have additionally that $$\sigma$$ is surjective because the equation equation $$x=y^p$$ has a root. This shows that $$\sigma$$ is an automorphism of $$\Omega$$. Now as the fixed points of any field automorphism form a field themselves as a trivial check confirms, we see that the fixed points of $$\sigma^f$$ form a field. Moreover we see that these points are exactly the solutions to the equation 

$$
X^{p^f}-X=0.
$$ 
We would like to show that this polynomial has distinct roots. To this end consider the derivative, which is

$$
p^fX^{p^f-1}-1=-1,
$$

as we are working in characteristic $$p$$. So, we see that each of the roots of this equation is distinct, moreover, because our field is algebraically closed there are actually $$p^f$$ such distinct roots. Now we just note that because $$card(K)=p^f$$ that each element of $$K$$ satisfies this equation either trivially as with $$0$$, or because we are raising each element to the power of the order of the group it belongs to when we apply $$\sigma^f$$. Note that this establishes that $$K$$ is the unique subfield of $$\Omega$$ containing $$p^f$$ elements.


Finally, to see that the field $$K$$ is the unique field of order $$p^f$$, note that we can embed any other such field inside of $$\Omega$$. From field theory we know that any finite degree field extension is isomorphic to $$F_p[x]/(p)$$ where $$p$$ is some irreducible polynomial over $$F_p$$. Thus because $$\Omega$$ is complete we can repeat this process inside of $$\Omega$$ to find an isomorphic subfield of $$\Omega$$. Then by our previous remarks, this subfield is isomorphic to $$K$$. So there is a unique field $$F_{p^f}$$. $$\square$$. 


---------------------------------------------

Next we consider the multiplicative group of a finite field $$F$$ of characteristic $$p$$ and order $$q=p^f$$. 

Our goal is the following theorem 

**Theorem** The units of the $$F$$, $$F_p^\*$$ are a cyclic group of order $$q-1$$. 

Before we are able to prove this we will need to Lemmas. 

**Lemma:** Let $$\phi$$ be the Euler Totient function then we have 

$$
n=\sum_{d\mid n} \phi(d).
$$

**Proof:** Each element of $$Z/nZ$$ generates a cyclic group of some order. Moreover there is a unique cyclic subgroup of $$Z/nZ$$ of each order $$d$$ dividing $$n$$, in particular this subgroup has $$\phi(d)$$ generators. So letting $$\Phi_d$$ be the set of generators of the subgroup of order $$d$$ of $$Z/nZ$$, we have 

$$
n=\sum_{d\mid n} card{\Phi_d}=\sum_{d\mid n} \phi(n). 
$$


We will use this to establish the following lemma:


**Lemma:** Let $$G$$ be a group of order $$n$$. Then if the number of elements $$x\in G$$ satisfying $$x^d=1$$ is at most $$d$$ then $$G$$ is a cyclic group. 

**Proof:** For each $$d$$ dividing $$n$$ suppose that $$G$$ has an element $$x$$ of order $$d$$. Then the subgroup generated by $$x$$ is of order $$d$$. Moreover, we see that as there are at most $$d$$ elements satisfying $$x^d=1$$ that each of these elements appears in the subgroup generated by $$x$$, so we see that if there is an element of order $$d$$, there are exactly $$\phi(d)$$ elements of order $$d$$. Then because $$\sum_{d\mid n} \phi(d)=n$$, we see that if there is not an element of order $$d$$ for some $$d\mid n$$, then there are not actually $$n$$ elements of $$G$$ as each element generates a subgroup of some order and must be counted in the sum. In particular this shows that $$G$$ contains an element of order $$n$$, and thus $$G$$ is cyclic. $$\square$$


Now in order to show the theorem, note that because $$F$$ is a field we have that $$X^d=1$$ has at most $$d$$ solutions, all of which lie in $$F^*$$. Thus by the above lemma we see that $$F^*$$ is a cylic group. 

Serre also observes that this establishes that any subgroup of $$F^*$$ is also a cyclic group, which can be seen by appealing to the logic above, or by recalling that all subgroups of a cylic group are cyclic. 




