---
layout: post
title: First Post
---

**Fact:** Let $$A$$ be an $$n\times n$$ matrix such that $$A^2=A$$, then $$A$$ is diagonalizable. 

**Proof:** Let $$v\in \mathbb{R}^n$$. Then we have that $$A^2v=Av$$, so that $$Av$$ is an eigenvector of $$A$$. Similarly, we see that $$A(v-Av)=0$$, and thus $$v-AV$$ is in the kernel of $$A$$. But moreover we see that $$v=Av+(v-Av)$$, so that we have written an arbitrary vector as the sum of eigenvectors and thus an eigenbasis exists and $$A$$ is diagonalizable. $$\square$$

The above fact also follows from the following theorem, which we will recall some things about first, following Hoffman and Kunze's *Linear Algebra*.

**Definition:**
Let $$T$$ be a linear operator on a vector space $$V$$ over a field $$F$$. Then the minimal polynomial for $$T$$ is the unique monic generator of the ideal of polynomials over $$F$$ which annihilate $$T$$. 

Note that the above definition makes sense because every $$\mathbb{F}[x]$$ is a principal ideal domain, and that the polynomials annihilating $$T$$ obviously form an ideal. Further note that similar matrices have the same minimal polynomial because if $f$ is a polynomial then we have that 

$$f(P^{-1}AP)=P^{-1}f(A)P.$$


**Proposition:** The minimal polynomial for the matrix $$A$$ with entries in a field $$\mathbb{F}$$ splits into distinct linear factors over $$\mathbb{F}$$ iff $$A$$ is diagonalizable.

**Proof:** If **A** is diagonalizable then it is clear that the minimal polynomial splits because the characteristic polynomial splits, and the minimal polynomial divides the characteristic polynomial.

For the other direction, suppose that the minimal polynomial for $$A$$ splits into distinct linear factors. It is a theorem that every irreducible factor of the characteristic polynomial must divide the minimal polynomial, so we see that as the minimal polynomial splits, so does the characteristic polynomial. Further, by considering the Jordan Canonical Form of $$A$$, we see that for a given linear factor $$x-\lambda$$ of the characteristic polynomial that the largest size that a Jordan block for $$\lambda$$ may be is the multiplicity of $$x-\lambda$$. As this is equal to $$1$$, we see that all associated Jordan blocks have size $$1$$, and thus the matrix is diagonalizable. $$\square$$


[Math Exchange](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/600745/idempotent-matrix-is-diagonalizable)

[Math Exchange](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/56745/minimal-polynomial-and-diagonalizable-matrix)


