---
layout: post
title: CA 1.2
date: 2015-07-13 20:53:00 +04:00
---

In this section we are considering whether a number of equations in several variables over a finite field may have a root. We let $$F$$ be a finite field of order $$q$$ and characteristic $$p$$.

We will be making use of the following function on polynomials $$p(X_1,...,X_n)\in F[X_1,...,X_n]$$, defined by 

$$
S(P)=\sum_{(x_1,...,x_n)\in F^n} P(x_1,...,x_n). 
$$

**Lemma** Let $$P=X^u$$. Then if $$u\ge 1$$ and $$q-1$$ divides $$u$$ we have that $$S(P)=-1$$, otherwise we have $$S(P)=0$$. We define $$x^0=1$$, even if $$x=0$$. 

**Proof** First, let $$u=0$$. Then $$x^u=1$$ for all $$x$$, so this sum is equal to $$q\cdot 1=0$$. 

Next, suppose that $$u\ge 1$$ and that $$q-1$$ divides $$u$$. Then we see that for $$x\neq 0$$, we have that $$x^u=1$$, so we have that $$S(P)=(q-1)\cdot 1=-1$$. 

Finally, suppose that $$u\ge 1$$ and that $$q-1$$ does not divide $$u$$. Then we see that there is some $$y\in F$$ such that $$y^u\neq 1,0$$, for instance a generator of $$F$$. Then because multiplication by $$y^u$$ permutes the elements of $$F$$, we see that 

$$
S(P)=\sum_{x\in F} x^u=\sum_{x\in F} y^ux^u=y^uS(P),
$$

and so $$(1-y^u)S(P)=0$$ and thus in this case $$S(P)$$ is equal to $$0$$. $$\square$$

Next we will prove our main theorem:

**Theorem** (Chevally-Warning) Let $\{f_\alpha\}$ be a collection of polynomials in $$F[X_1,...,X_n]$$ such that $$\sum_{\alpha} deg(f_\alpha)<n$$. Then let $$V$$ be the number of common $$0$$'s of $$\{f_\alpha\}$ over all of $$F$$. Then 

$$
card(V)\equiv 0 \mod p. 
$$

**Proof:** Let $$P=\prod_{\alpha}(1-f_\alpha^{q-1})$$. Then we see that for $$x\in V$$ we have that $$P(x)$$ is equal to $$1$$, and otherwise $$P(x)=0$$. So, we see that $$P$$ is the indicator function for $$V$$. Now note that if we sum $$P(x)$$ over all of the elements $$x$$ in $$F^n$$, that we count each one so we have that 

$$
card(V)\equiv S(P)\mod p.
$$

Then to establish the theorem we need only show that $$S(P)\equiv 0 \mod p$$. So, note that if we multiply out $$P$$ that we get a polynomial consisting of monomials $$X_1^{u_1}\ldots X_n^{u_n}$$. Then because we assumed that $$\sum_{\alpha}deg(f_\alpha)<n$, we see that the degree of this monomial is less than $$n(q-1)$$. In particular, this shows that for some $$1\le i\le n$$ we have $$u_i<q-1$$. So, we can then sum over each such monomial individually. Without loss of generality say that $$i=1$$. Then we see that 

$$
S(X_1^{u_1}\ldots X_n^{u_n})=\left(\sum_{x_1\in F} x^{u_1}\right)\sum_{(x_2,...,x_n)\in F^{n-1}} X_2^{u_2}\ldots X_n^{u_n}=0,
$$ 
by the lemma. Thus summing over all the monomials we find that $$S(P)\equiv 0\mod p$$ and we are done. $$\square$$. 

We can now use the above theorem to study certain families of equations. For instance, if we take a family $$\{f_\alpha\}$$ such that none of the $$f_\alpha$$ have a constant term and the sum of their degrees is less than $$n$$, then we see that $$\{0\}$$ is a solution to the system, and so by the previous theorem we see that there are non-trivial solutions as well as otherwise $$card(V)$$ fails to be congruent to $$0\mod p$$. 

Serre notes that the above theorem shows that a quadratic equation in $$3$$ variables has non-trivial solutions. More generally the application of the above theorem shows that as long as the degree of the polynomial is less than the number of variables then we have solutions. The trick is to be able to find a point on the polynomial easily and then apply the theorem to pop out some non-trivial solutions. 




