---
layout: post
title: CA 1.3
date: 2015-07-13 21:53:00 +04:00
---

In this post, we prove the quadratic reciprocity theorem. This theorem basically gives us some relationships about when a number is a square in the field $$F_p$$. To begin, we start with some preliminary remarks about how the square relate to the non-squares. 

**Prop** For $$F_{p^r}$$, if $$p=2$$, then every element of $$F_{p^r}$$ is a square. Otherwise exactly half of the units are squares, so that the square form a subgroup of index two in $$F_{p^r}$$. 

**Proof** The case $$p=2$$ follows immediately from the existence of the Frobenius automorphism. 

Otherwise suppose $$p>2$$, then consider the map that takes $$x\mapsto x^{(p-1)/2}$$. The image of $$x$$ is a square root of unity and thus is either $$-1$$ or $$1$$. We claim that if this value is $$1$$ then $$x$$ is a square. In particular, $$x$$ is a square in $$F_{p^r}$$ if and only if there is some element $$y\in F_{p^r}$$ such that $$y^2=x$$. Then the image of $$x$$ under this mapping is $$1$$. So, we see that the set of $$F_{p^r}^*$$ that consists of squares is a subgroup, and moreover this subgroup is the kernel of the map given previously. That this is a subgroup of index $$2$$ follows because the squaring map is two-to-one mapping $$F_{p^r}$$ onto the subgroup of squares. Serre says that the same can be observed by using that $$F_q^*$$ is cyclic of order $$q-1$$. To do this just pick a generator of the group, $$x$$, and it is easy to check that any square must be of the form $$x^{2d}$$. $$\square$$

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this section we define the Legendre symbol, which is defined for $$F_p$$. This function basically encodes the information that we are interested in using about Quadratic reciprocity. We define for $$l\not\equiv 0\mod p$$. 

$$
\left(\frac{l}{p}\right)=-1^{(p-1)/2},
$$
and we define

$$
\left(\frac{0}{p}\right)=0.
$$

It follows immediately from the definition that we have 

$$
\left(\frac{x}{p}\right)\left(\frac{y}{p}\right)=\left(\frac{xy}{p}\right).
$$

Moreover we see from the last section that the Legendre symbol is equal to $$1$$ if $$l$$ is a square and $$-1$$ if it is not. 

In certain simple cases we can just evaluate the Legendre symbol. 


$$
\left(\frac{1}{p}\right)=1,
$$

this is clear because $$1^2=1$$.

$$
\left(\frac{-1}{p}\right)=(-1)^\epsilon(p)
$$

where $$\epsilon(p)$$ is given by $$0$$ if $$(p-1)/2$$ is even, i.e. $$p\equiv 1\mod 4$$, and is $$-1$$ if $$(p-1)/2$$ is odd, i.e. $$p\equiv 3\mod 4$$. A slightly more complicated symbol which is of use is 

$$
\left(\frac{2}{p}\right)=(-1)^{\omega(p)},
$$

where $$\omega(p)$$ is defined in the following manner, $$0$$ if $$p\equiv \pm 1\mod 8$$, and $$1$$ if $$p\equiv \pm 3\mod 8$$, these are checking the parity of $$(n^2-1)/8$$.

To establish this Legendre symbol requires slightly more work. The idea here is to go into an extension field where $$2$$ has a square root, and then use that square root to calculate in the present field. So, let $$\alpha$$ be a primitive $$8$$th root of unity. Then we set $$y=\alpha+\alpha^{-1}$$. Then note that 

$$
y^2=\alpha^2+2+\alpha^{-2}=2,
$$
because we have that $$\alpha^2+\alpha^{-2}=0$$, because its square is $$\alpha^4+2+\alpha^{4}=0$$ because $$\alpha^{4}=0$$. This means that we can use $$y$$ for computing the Legendre symbol. In particular we see that 

$$
\left(\frac{2}{p}\right)=(y^2)^{(p-1)/2}=y^{p-1}=(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})^{p-1}
$$
Now if $$p\equiv \pm 1\mod 8$$, then we see that as 

$$(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})^p=(\alpha^p+\alpha^{-p})=(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})$$ 

then we have that $$(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})^{p-1}=1$$. Otherwise, if $$p\equiv \pm 5\mod 8$$,  we see that 

$$(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})^p=(\alpha^p+\alpha^{-p})=(\alpha^5+\alpha^{-5})=-(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})$$,

so in this case we have that  $$(\alpha+\alpha^{-1})^{p-1}=-1$$. These are exactly the cases that are described above. 

The above Legendre symbol calculations can be more concisely stated as asserting that $$-1$$ is a square iff $$p\equiv 1 \mod 4$$ and $$2$$ a square iff $$p\equiv \pm 1 \mod 8$$. 

---------------------------------------------------------------
In this section we actually prove Quadratic Reciprocity

**Theorem** (Gauss) Let $$l$$ and $$p$$ be two distinct odd prime numbers, then
$$
\left(\frac{l}{p}\right)=\left(\frac{p}{l}\right)(-1)^{\epsilon(p)\epsilon(l)},
$$

i.e. both of $$p$$ and $$l$$ are squares modulo each other if one of  $$p,l\equiv 1\mod 4$$, and they are opposites otherwise. 

To prove this we will use Gauss sums. The idea behind this is to find the square root so that we can compute with it to learn information about what is happening in the sums. So, to this end we define the gauss sum. Let $\omega$ be a primitive $l$th root of unity in the algebraic closure of $\F_p$. Then we write 

$$
y=\sum_{x\in F_l} \left(\frac{x}{l}\right)\omega^x.
$$

Note that writing $$\omega^x$$ is makes sense because this quantity is well defined.

Our first claim is that 

$$
y^2=(-1)^{\epsilon(l)}l,
$$
where we are considering the image of $$l$$ in $$\F_p$$. 

So, if we write this out we have 

$$
y^2=\sum_{x,y\in F_l} \left(\frac{xy}{l}\right)\omega^{x+y}=\sum_{u\in F_l}  \omega^u\sum_{t\in F_l} \left(\frac{(u-t)t}{l}\right)=\sum_{u\in F_l}  \omega^u\sum_{t\in F_l} \left(\frac{t^2(ut^{-1}-1)}{l}\right)=\sum_{u\in F_l}  \omega^u\sum_{t\in F_l} \left(\frac{ut^{-1}-1}{l}\right)
$$

Now the value $$ut^{-1}$$ in the above sum ranges over all the elements of $$x\in F_l$$ when $$u\neq 0$$, in which case the sum is $$0$$ as there are as many squares as non-squares. In the remaining case the sum is equal to $$(-1)^{\epsilon(l)}*l$$ as there are $$l$$ elements in $$F_l$$. Thus we have established that

$$
y^2=(-1)^{\epsilon(l)}l,
$$









