---
layout: post
title: CA 1.1
---


Let $$K$$ be a field of characteristic $$p\neq 0$$. Define $$\sigma(x)=x^p$$, this map is called the Frobenius endomorphism of $$K$$. 


---------------------------------------------
**Proposition** The map $$\sigma$$ is an injective endomorphism of $$K$$ onto one of its subfields $$K^p$$. 

---------------------------------------------
**Proof:** To check that $$\sigma(x+y)=\sigma(x)+\sigma(y)$$, use the divisibility of the binomial coefficients. That $$\sigma(x)\sigma(y)=\sigma(xy)$$ is obvious. So, this map is an endomorphism. Then to see that this map is injective note that if $$\sigma(x)-\sigma(y)=0$$, then we have that 

$$
0=x^p+y^p=(x+y)^p,
$$

so, $$x+y$$ is equal to $$0$$ as $$K$$ is a field. $$\square$$. 

We will now through and establish the following theorem

---------------------------------------------
Let $$\Omega$$ be an algebraically closed field of characteristic $$p$$ and let $$K$$ be a subfield of $$\Omega$$ with degree $$f=[K,F_p]$$ over $$F_p$$. 

* Then $$|K|=p^f$$. 
* $$K$$ is the fixed field of, $$\sigma^f$$, the $$f$$-fold application of $$\sigma$$ to $$\Omega$$.
* Any field with $$p^f$$ elements is isomorphic to $$K$$.


---------------------------------------------

**Proof**

The first claim follows immediately from the definition of the degree of an extension---we are just picking a basis and counting all of the ways we could form vectors from that basis. 

Next, note that because $$\Omega$$ is complete we have additionally that $$\sigma$$ is surjective because the equation equation $$x=y^p$$ has a root. This shows that $$\sigma$$ is an automorphism of $$\Omega$$. Now as the fixed points of any field automorphism form a field themselves as a trivial check confirms, we see that the fixed points of $$\sigma^f$$ form a field. Moreover we see that these points are exactly the solutions to the equation 

$$
X^{p^f}-X=0.
$$ 
We would like to show that this polynomial has distinct roots. To this end consider the derivative, which is

$$
p^fX^{p^f-1}-1=-1,
$$

as we are working in characteristic $$p$$. 


the fixed field of $$\sigma^f$$ is a








